docs: Enhance Bootstrap node deployment docs (#2178)
scality/metalk8s: docs/operation/troubleshooting.rst

.. _Troubleshooting Guide:

Troubleshooting Guide
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This section highlights some of the common problems users face during and
after a MetalK8s installation. If you do not find a solution to a problem you
are facing, please reach out to us or create a

> `Github issue <https://github.com/scality/metalk8s/issues>`_.

Reviewer: Mention Scality support?

Bootstrap Installation Errors
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Bootstrap Installation fails with no straightforward reason
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If during a MetalK8s installation you encounter a failure and the console
output does not provide sufficient information in order to pin-point the cause

> of failure, then re-run the installation with verbose arguments(--verbose).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of failure, then re-run the installation with the verbose flag (``--verbose``).
```

.. parsed-literal::

   root@bootstrap $ /srv/scality/metalk8s-|release|/bootstrap.sh --verbose

Errors after restarting the Bootstrap node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If you restart the Bootstrap node and for some reason, some containers

Reviewer: nitpick: `reboot` is more obvious than `restart`, maybe I'm wrong.

Bootstrap fails and console log is unscrollable
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If during a MetalK8s installation, the Bootstrap process fails and the console
output is unscrollable then you can consult the Bootstrap logs in
``/var/log/metalk8s-bootstrap.log``.

Account Administration Errors
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Forgot the MetalK8s GUI password
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you forget the MetalK8s GUI username and/or password combination,
follow
:ref:`this procedure <Administering-MetalK8s-GUI-Kubernetes-API-and-Salt-API>`
to reset or change it.

General Kubernetes Resource Errors
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Pod status shows "CrashLoopBackOff"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If after a MetalK8s installation, you notice some Pods are in a state of
"CrashLoopBackOff", then it means pods are crashing because they start up then
immediately exit, thus Kubernetes restarts them and the cycle continues.
To get possible clues about this error, run the following commands and inspect
the output.

.. code-block:: shell

   kubectl -n <namespace-name> describe pod <pod name>

   kubectl -n <namespace-name> logs -p  <pod name>

> Persistent Volume Claim(PVC) stuck in "Pending" state

Reviewer: Great troubleshooting suggestions, thanks!! I think we could improve those a bit by providing expected output, this would help users being more autonomous (if they have a hard time understanding Kubernetes)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If after provisioning a volume for a Pod say Prometheus and the PVC still

Reviewer: For clarity:

```suggestion
If after provisioning a volume for a Pod (e.g. Prometheus) and the PVC still
```

> hangs in a ``Pending`` state, then try checking the following.

Reviewer: Use an unordered list for the various checks

```suggestion
hangs in a ``Pending`` state, then try checking the following:

- Volumes have been provisioned and their status is ``Ready``: [...]
```

> Check that the volumes have been provisioned and it's status is ``Ready``:

Reviewer: Volume being an actual CRD, it could make sense to capitalize occurences of `Volumes`

.. code-block:: shell

   kubectl describe volume <volume name>

> Check that a corresponding Persistent volume exist:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check that a corresponding PersistentVolume exist:
```

.. code-block:: shell

   kubectl get pv

If no Persistent volume exist, then check that the storage operator is up
and running.

.. code-block:: shell

>    kubectl -n kube-system get pods

Reviewer: Better to look at the Deployment object I believe:

```suggestion
   kubectl -n kube-system get deployments storage-operator
```

Access to MetalK8s GUI fails with "undefined backend"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If in the cause of using the MetalK8s GUI, you encounter an "undefined
backend" error then perform the following checks.

Check that the Ingress pods are running:

.. code-block:: shell

>    kubectl -n metalk8s-ingress get pods

Reviewer: Ditto, Deployments give a simpler information, including the number of expected Pods compared to the actual number.

Author: True... only that the deployments returns the following which is not sufficient i think :<

```
[root@bootstrap vagrant]# kubectl -n metalk8s-ingress get deployments
NAME                            READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
nginx-ingress-default-backend   1/1     1            1           4d18h

```

Check the Ingress controller logs:

.. code-block:: shell

>    kubectl -n metalk8s-ingress logs <nginx-ingress-pod-name>

Reviewer: Since Metal UI runs behind the control-plane Ingress, it would make sense to:

- provide a query to list all relevant Pods (using a label selector, e.g. `-l release=nginx-ingress-control-plane`)
- then show how to read the logs using the target Pod's name

Pod and Service CIDR conflicts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If after installation of a MetalK8s cluster you notice that Pod to pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If after installation of a MetalK8s cluster you notice that Pod-to-Pod
```

> communication has routing problems, perform the following.

Reviewer: Ditto, use a colon and list all checks in a unordered list

Check that Pod network subnets do not conflict with host networks by verifying

> allocated pod IP addresses:

Reviewer: Maybe not the most straightforward approach. Let's add a first check on the actual network values:

```rst
- Check the configured values for the internal Pod and Service networks:

   .. code-block:: shell

      root@bootstrap # salt-call pillar.get metalk8s:networks

   Make sure the configured IP ranges (CIDR notation) do not conflict with your infrastructure.
```

After a check like this one, there shouldn't be a need to go through the `kubectl get pods` command. Going further may look into more advanced commands, such as `traceroute` or `tcpdump`. Not sure it's worth going too far in this iteration though.

.. _Troubleshooting Guide:

Troubleshooting Guide
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This section highlights some of the common problems users face during and
after a MetalK8s installation. If you do not find a solution to a problem you
are facing, please reach out to **Scality support** or create a
`Github issue <https://github.com/scality/metalk8s/issues>`_.

Bootstrap Installation Errors
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Bootstrap Installation fails with no straightforward reason
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If during a MetalK8s installation you encounter a failure and the console
output does not provide sufficient information in order to pin-point the cause
of failure, then re-run the installation with the verbose flag (``--verbose``).

.. parsed-literal::

   root@bootstrap $ /srv/scality/metalk8s-|release|/bootstrap.sh --verbose

Errors after restarting the Bootstrap node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you reboot the Bootstrap node and for some reason, some containers
(especially the salt-master container) refuses to start then perform the
following checks:

- Check and ensure that the **MetalK8s ISO** is mounted properly.

>   .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer: You need to use `parsed-literal` for substitutions like `|release|` to work

     [root@bootstrap vagrant]# mount | grep /srv/scality/metalk8s-|release|
     /home/centos/metalk8s.iso on /srv/scality/metalk8s-|release| type iso9660 (ro,relatime)

- If the ISO is unmounted, run the following command which will check the
  the status of the ISO file and remount it automatically.

>   .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  .. parsed-literal::
```

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Forgot the MetalK8s GUI password
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you forget the MetalK8s GUI username and/or password combination,
follow
:ref:`this procedure <Administering-MetalK8s-GUI-Kubernetes-API-and-Salt-API>`
to reset or change it.

General Kubernetes Resource Errors
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Pod status shows "CrashLoopBackOff"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If after a MetalK8s installation, you notice some Pods are in a state of
"CrashLoopBackOff", then it means pods are crashing because they start up then
immediately exit, thus Kubernetes restarts them and the cycle continues.
To get possible clues about this error, run the following commands and inspect
the output.

.. code-block:: shell

   [root@bootstrap vagrant]# kubectl -n kube-system describe pods <pod name>
    Name:                 <pod name>
    Namespace:            kube-system
    Priority:             2000000000
    Priority Class Name:  system-cluster-critical

Persistent Volume Claim(PVC) stuck in "Pending" state
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If after provisioning a Volume for a Pod (e.g. Prometheus) and the PVC still

> hangs in a ``Pending`` state, then try checking the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hangs in a **Pending** state, then try checking the following:
```

> - Check that the volumes have been provisioned and it's status is ``Ready``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check that the volumes have been provisioned and are in a **Ready** state:
```

  .. code-block:: shell

     kubectl describe volume <volume-name>
     [root@bootstrap vagrant]# kubectl describe volume test-volume
      Name:         <volume-name>
      Status:
        Conditions:
          Last Transition Time:  2020-01-14T12:57:56Z
          Last Update Time:      2020-01-14T12:57:56Z
          Status:                True
          Type:                  Ready

> - Check that a corresponding PersistentVolume exist:

Reviewer 2: Another thing worth checking is that the PV matches the PVC constraints (size, labels, storage class).

  .. code-block:: shell

     [root@bootstrap vagrant]# kubectl get pv
     NAME                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS  STORAGECLASS             AGE
     <volume-name>              10Gi       RWO            Retain          Bound  metalk8s-prometheus      4d22h

- If no PersistentVolume exist, then check that the storage operator is up
  and running.

  .. code-block:: shell

     [root@bootstrap vagrant]# kubectl -n kube-system get deployments storage-operator
     NAME               READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
     storage-operator   1/1     1            1           4d22h

Access to MetalK8s GUI fails with "undefined backend"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If in the cause of using the MetalK8s GUI, you encounter an "undefined

> backend" error then perform the following checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
backend" error then perform the following checks:
```

  .. code-block:: shell

     [root@bootstrap vagrant]#  kubectl -n metalk8s-ingress get daemonsets
     NAME                                     DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   NODE SELECTOR                     AGE
     nginx-ingress-control-plane-controller   1         1         1       1            1           node-role.kubernetes.io/master=   4d22h
     nginx-ingress-controller                 1         1         1       1            1           <none>                            4d22h

- Check the Ingress controller logs:

  .. code-block:: shell

     [root@bootstrap vagrant]# kubectl logs -n metalk8s-ingress nginx-ingress-control-plane-controller-ftg6v
      -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      NGINX Ingress controller
        Release:       0.26.1
        Build:         git-2de5a893a
        Repository:    https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx
        nginx version: openresty/1.15.8.2

Pod and Service CIDR conflicts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If after installation of a MetalK8s cluster you notice that Pod-to-Pod
communication has routing problems, perform the following:

> - Check the configured values for the internal POD and Service networks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the configured values for the internal Pod and Service networks:
```

  .. code-block:: shell

     [root@bootstrap vagrant]# salt-call pillar.get networks
     local:
         ----------
         control_plane:
             172.21.254.0/28
         pod:
             10.233.0.0/16
         service:
             10.96.0.0/12
         workload_plane:
             172.21.254.32/27

>   Make sure the configured IP ranges (CIDR notation) do not conflicts with your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Make sure the configured IP ranges (CIDR notation) do not conflict with your
```

Persistent Volume Claim(PVC) stuck in "Pending" state
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If after provisioning a Volume for a Pod (e.g. Prometheus) and the PVC still
hangs in a **Pending** state, then try checking the following:

- Check that the volumes have been provisioned and are in a **Ready** state:

  .. code-block:: shell

     kubectl describe volume <volume-name>
     [root@bootstrap vagrant]# kubectl describe volume test-volume
      Name:         <volume-name>
      Status:
        Conditions:
          Last Transition Time:  2020-01-14T12:57:56Z
          Last Update Time:      2020-01-14T12:57:56Z
          Status:                True
          Type:                  Ready

- Check that a corresponding PersistentVolume exist:

  .. code-block:: shell

     [root@bootstrap vagrant]# kubectl get pv
     NAME                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS  STORAGECLASS             AGE       CLAIM
     <volume-name>              10Gi       RWO            Retain          Bound  <storage-class-name>     4d22h     <persistentvolume-claim-name>

- Check that the PersistentVolume matches the PersistentVolume Claim

>   constraints(size, labels, storage class) by doing the following:

Reviewer 2: missing space before `(`

.. _Troubleshooting Guide:

Troubleshooting Guide
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This section highlights some of the common problems users face during and
after a MetalK8s installation. If you do not find a solution to a problem you
are facing, please reach out to us or create a
`Github issue <https://github.com/scality/metalk8s/issues>`_.

Bootstrap Installation Errors
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Bootstrap Installation fails with no straightforward reason
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If during a MetalK8s installation you encounter a failure and the console
output does not provide sufficient information in order to pin-point the cause
of failure, then re-run the installation with verbose arguments(--verbose).

.. parsed-literal::

   root@bootstrap $ /srv/scality/metalk8s-|release|/bootstrap.sh --verbose

Errors after restarting the Bootstrap node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If you restart the Bootstrap node and for some reason, some containers

Reviewer 3: Missing an `and` or something here.

(especially the salt-master container) refuses to start, check and ensure that
the **MetalK8s ISO** is mounted properly.

Bootstrap fails and console log is unscrollable
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If during a MetalK8s installation, the Bootstrap process fails and the console
output is unscrollable then you can consult the Bootstrap logs in
``/var/log/metalk8s-bootstrap.log``.

Account Administration Errors
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Forgot the MetalK8s GUI password
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you forget the MetalK8s GUI username and/or password combination,
follow
:ref:`this procedure <Administering-MetalK8s-GUI-Kubernetes-API-and-Salt-API>`
to reset or change it.

> .. todo::

Reviewer 4: are you going to handle this in this PR?

Author: I think the two last ones are not mission critical

Reviewer: Troubleshooting for networking is indeed a large part and may be relegated to a future enhancement (worth opening a ticket to track this however, cc @thomasdanan).

For Salt logs, I think it would make sense to at least document it somewhere. Let's keep it for 2.4.2, but not this PR, which is already quite big.
